---
title: "My Experiences at Databricks"
date: 2021-08-02T14:39:29-07:00
draft: false
---

When I was working on the batch scheduling team at Facebook, I noticed something unusual. Facebook was migrating all of its data workloads from the in-house Hive system to a new system based on open-source Spark. This was strange because I’ve heard countless times from our engineers that open-source tools simply can’t operate at the Facebook scale. So why then was Facebook adopting Spark instead of building something from scratch like it usually does? Even though I had no idea what Spark was back then, I started to think there was something special about it.

So I spent some time reading about the technology. Spark was started by professors and researchers in UC Berkeley’s [AMPLab](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AMPLab). I came to learn the creators of Spark co-founded Databricks to provide a managed Spark-as-a-Service offering. During this point in my career, I was deciding whether I wanted to pursue a Masters/PhD in Computer Science or stay in the software industry. Ultimately I decided to join Databricks because it seemed like a perfect middle ground where I could work on distributed systems with people from academia while still getting paid.

# **Joining Databricks**

### First Impressions

It was immediately clear when I joined that my time at Databricks would be drastically different from Facebook. Most of the knowledge I built up about Facebook’s internal ecosystem became worthless overnight. For 2 months I was completely lost when my colleagues discussed public tooling and related jargon like Kubernetes Daemonsets, NAT Gateways, and BoneCP. This was a major problem for me, so whenever I heard a new term I’d jot it down. Later I’d spend lots of time researching the new terms and concisely summarizing what I had learned. Ramping up was difficult but I was learning at an extremely fast pace, which is exactly what I wanted. And this time the knowledge I was gaining about open-source technology and public tools would serve me for the rest of my career. I realized in retrospect that relying on Facebook’s world-class tools actually weakened some of my engineering skills because these tools abstracted away so much detail and complexity. Ramping up at Databricks also made me fluent in Scala, which gave me an entirely new perspective on programming (see separate [post](https://www.awelm.com/posts/scala/)).

I also noticed that Databricks heavily exposed me to trends in the data industry and other tools/companies in the market. By listening to coworker conversations I would learn about things like the JDBC protocol, dbt, and Apache Arrow. Everyone I met at Databricks was extremely sharp and invested in the company mission. Managers, PMs, and even sales people would have long technical debates and there was never any topic too detailed to discuss. Even our CEO would ask questions about details like JVM startup time. My mentors and managers stunned me with their knowledge and brilliance - I didn’t realize engineers could be so good! I was inspired to work really hard so that one day I could become like them. In fact, the reason I even started this blog was because I saw the value of my mentor’s excellent technical communication and wanted to grow in this area.

### My Contributions

**Serverless Team:**

I started my Databricks journey on the Serverless team. This was a natural team to join given my prior experience in resource management at Facebook. The Serverless team was born because customers were tired of babysitting the VMs in their Spark clusters. Before this team existed, customers would have to manually adjust the cluster size or terminate the cluster depending on resource utilization. Also customers would have to manually recover machines in the cloud that became unresponsive due to various reasons like spot kills, OOMs, etc. The Serverless team built cluster [autoscaling](https://docs.databricks.com/clusters/configure.html#cluster-size-and-autoscaling), autorecovery, [autotermination](https://docs.databricks.com/clusters/clusters-manage.html#automatic-termination), and driver health monitoring features to free customers from these mundane operational tasks (see [patent](https://patents.justia.com/patent/10474501)). I found those features really interesting and important, so I volunteered to help migrate them to a new microservice to improve scalability. Soon afterwards there was a re-org and I moved to the Clusters team along with these features that I now owned.

**Clusters Team:**

Joining the Clusters team led to another huge phase of learning. This team was responsible for the provisioning and management of VMs, disks, and other resources needed to create Spark clusters. Working on this team made me fluent with Kubernetes and cloud tooling like S3, Terraform, and IAM. Initially I was put on a new project which would move our VM acquisition and lifecycle management logic into a new microservice. This was needed to unlock the next level of scale because Databricks usage was skyrocketing and we were trying to keep up with customer demand. I got to design and build many interesting components like our VM garbage collector and our VM pool capacity management algorithm. After this project completed, I volunteered to do an emergency upgrade all our primary databases from MySQL 5.6 → 5.7. This project was painful but I’m glad I did it because I truly internalized all the best practices involved in migrating an online database while ensuring high availability. I’m sure this problem will show up again in my career. I also added the company’s first MySQL read replicas to help our persistence layer support the growing traffic that was mostly read-heavy. This project taught me more about the MySQL binlog, managing replication lag, and improving databases performance by tuning configurations like the transaction log disk flush delay.

**Databricks-Hosted Compute:**

In 2020 Databricks started to focus on supporting BI workloads because Snowflake had shown us  the data analyst market was pretty large. Some of our customers were already using Databricks for BI, even though it wasn’t specifically designed for this use case. Low latency is a must-have for a good BI experience because there is a live human waiting for the UI to respond. In order to make BI queries faster, my team started a new project responsible for provisioning compute more quickly. At the time, it took roughly 2 minutes to start a cluster and our goal was to reduce it to 10 seconds. We decided to achieve this by creating a new type of cluster that was backed by VMs from a Databricks AWS account (as opposed to VMs from a customer’s AWS account). This meant we could do perform latency-reducing optimizations like caching pre-warmed VMs and eagerly starting Spark without spending customer money. I was the second full-time contributor on this project, and the team quickly grew in size and scope. I can confidently say [this](https://databricks.com/blog/2021/08/30/announcing-databricks-serverless-sql.html) was the most interesting and exciting project I’ve worked on in my career. I learned a lot about Kubernetes, multi-tenant security, and navigating issues with backwards compatibility.

### Other Contributions Inspired By Facebook

My experiences at Facebook gave me opinions about how Databricks should scale certain things. Because I had previously worked at a much larger company with mature tooling and engineering practices, I felt like I could almost see the future at Databricks. Others who have previously worked at big tech companies likely have similar stories.

When I started at Databricks, I couldn't help but notice our configuration system was much worse than Facebook's. Databricks service configurations were injected into our microservice containers via environment variables, which meant Kubernetes would restart the container upon any config change. We didn’t have zero downtime service restarts at the time because we served some APIs using state stored in memory, so engineers would usually ship config changes with releases to minimize downtime. This meant it would typically take 2 weeks to flip a flag to enable some feature in production. At Facebook there were thousands of engineers merging config changes to prod within minutes every day. Databricks had briefly experimented with Launch Darkly, but quickly but stopped because too many outages were caused by flipping flags without proper testing or diligence. I tried to persuade the company to reconsider using dynamic configurations but it was deemed to risky.

Then about a year later, I noticed our founding engineer publish a design doc for a tool to deploy emergency config changes without restarting the container. I reached out to him and we built a prototype during a hackathon that enabled engineers make emergency config changes to prod within 2 minutes. Our prototype made dynamic configuration changes safe because we checked all config changes into source control, which ensured auditability, peer review, and CI verification. We won a company stability prize for our prototype and it was soon productionized by another teammate. A few months later, our tool was commonly used to mitigate large outages across the company. This was a satisfying experience and made me grateful for the perspectives Facebook has given me.

### Thoughts on Snowflake

Many people ask about my thoughts on Snowflake and if I worry about the competition. Obviously I’m extremely biased, but the short answer is no. What Snowflake has done is incredible, but there are a few reasons why I think Databricks will be more successful. Some of my reasons are objective and some are just personal opinions. Note that reasons below might be based on outdated or even incorrect data. These are just my 2 cents and when in doubt you should trust more rigorous sources.

1. **Benchmarks**\
    Databricks currently holds the [world record](https://venturebeat.com/2021/11/03/databricks-surpasses-world-record-for-data-warehouse-performance/) for the TPC-DS data warehouse performance benchmark, which means that Databricks is beating Snowflake at its own game in both performance and cost. Databricks is not a data warehouse company -  its primary focuses have been data science, ETL, and machine learning. Snowflake still claims they have faster benchmark results, but you can read this [post](https://databricks.com/blog/2021/11/15/snowflake-claims-similar-price-performance-to-databricks-but-not-so-fast.html) to see why this isn’t true and verify things for yourself.
    
2. **Talent + Expertise**\
    Databricks engineering talent is unparalleled to any other company I’ve seen. The company has managed to recruit a good portion of the world’s top database talent. For example Databricks recently hired the director leading Google’s [Spanner](https://futurism.com/4-googles-spanner-is-now-available-on-the-cloud-for-everyone), which is probably the most sophisticated database in the world today. I’ve also seen Databricks consistently recruit and collaborate with top researchers specializing in databases research. Access to top talent
    and the latest developments is crucial when competing in a field heavily affected by innovation.
    
3. **Vision + Architecture**\
    In the long run, I think Databricks will win because they have the better architecture. Snowflake’s data warehouse architecture requires 2 copies of data to be stored and maintained. Databricks does analytics on data in-place and this data typically resides in blob storage. The Databricks architecture is inherently better because it is:
    - Less expensive because blob storage is cheap and only 1 copy of the data is required
    - Provides more realtime results because analytics are done on the data source itself (as opposed to an outdated copy that was synced to the warehouse)
    - More flexible because it can handle unstructured data. This especially important for enabling newer use cases like machine learning
    - Less complex because there are no data syncing tools and associated operational overhead involved

If you want to hear a less biased perspective, this [article](https://www.datagrom.com/data-science-machine-learning-ai-blog/snowflake-vs-databricks) provides a pretty fair comparison of Snowflake and Databricks.

# Reflections & Lessons Learned

In 2021 I left Databricks to try building my own company. After leaving I have reflected on my time at Databricks and there are a few lessons I’ve internalized.

1. If you’re early in your career, optimize for learning and personal growth instead of promotions and money. Of course not everyone has the privilege to do this, but when possible I always recommend it. This approach is more fun and also more closely correlated with skill, which eventually leads to promotions and money anyways. Looking back now, joining Databricks was the best financial decision I’ve ever made even though that wasn’t my goal. Even if the company wasn't a success, I would have no regrets because knowledge and skill are priceless to me.
2. The importance of working with top talent cannot be overstated. This factor is more important to me than the pay, company financials, and benefits. If the people are great, I have more faith that other factors will end up working out.
3. Don’t settle for work that doesn't interest you. Early in my career I became painfully aware that the technical problems I enjoyed weren’t important to my team. I kept switching teams until my interests aligned with the business needs. Each time I switched, I got closer and closer to the work I actually enjoyed. I’m glad I kept searching instead of settling because now I’m very satisfied with my career.